Virtual Sea Trial – Ensuring that a single shortened sea trial is sufficient to pass all future ship commissions 
Sustainable Shipping 
Press release
Virtual Sea Traial press release
Novia University of Applied Sciences and project partners set out to innovate shipbuilding and commissioning with the three-year co-innovation project Virtual Sea Trial, funded by Business Finland. The Virtual Sea Trial project is an international collaboration working closely with the shipbuilding industry and the Meyer Turku Necoleap ecosystem.   
  
Modern large cruise ships are essentially small floating cities, necessitating all onboard systems to function and interact flawlessly and safely. Yet, the validation and verification of system-level functionality traditionally occurs late in shipbuilding, typically during harbor and sea trials”, says Mikael Manngård, Project Manager at Novia UAS.    
 
The Virtual Sea-Trial project aims to shift the system-level testing months to years earlier by developing virtual commissioning and testing technologies. The goal is that maritime technology providers and shipyards can demonstrate new, efficient ways of designing, building, and testing onboard systems through virtualization. The risk associated with installing novel green technological innovations onboard is thus reduced.   
 
Mirva Salokorpi, Research Manager at Novia UAS, expressed her satisfaction with the new project, stating that it is gratifying when strategic work pays off.” She went on to explain that the consortium of Universities of Applied Sciences, Universities, and industry built up in previous projects laid the groundwork for this project. The insights gained from previous collaborations provided a strategic roadmap for implementing the Virtual Sea Trial Project.  
 
Virtual Sea Trial is a 6-million-euro public research project funded by Business Finland. Novia’s part is 2.3 million euros, and the project starts in 2024. The consortium consists of the following partners: Novia University of Applied Sciences, Åbo Akademi University, University of Turku, University of Oulu, Meyer Turku, Wärtsilä, Kongsberg Maritime Finland, Valmet, Steerprop, Loisto Pro, Semantum, and Cadmatic.


For more information, contact  
Novia UAS, Project Leader, Mikael Manngård 
Novia UAS, Research Manager, Mirva Salokorpi

Sender
Novia UAS, Communicator, Caroline Lång 

About the project
Duration: January 2024 – December 2026 

Budget 

Total budget for the publicly-funded project 6M EUR 
Total budget for Novia UAS: 2,3M EUR
Coordinator: Novia University of Applied Sciences, Mikael Manngård 

Research organizations: Novia University of Applied Sciences, Åbo Akademi University, University of Turku, University of Oulu

Company partners: Meyer Turku Oy, Valmet Automation Oy, Cadmatic Oy, Loisto Pro Oy, Kongsberg Maritime Finland Oy , Steerprop Oy, Semantum Oy. Wärtsilä Oyj 

International collaborators: Meyer Werft (Germany), ALFRED Maritime (Germany), Fraunhofer CML (Germany), KTH Royal Institute of Technology (Sweden), Tallinn University of Technology (Estonia), Reykjavik University (Island), University of Southern Denmark (Denmark) 

Ecosystem: NEcOLEAP 

Funding partners: Business Finland 

----

Virtual Commissioning Interfaces
We study how the commissioning process can be improved through digitalization. The focus is on managing, monitoring, retrieving, and enhancing data using AI and advanced human-machine interfaces.

Information Management
The aim task is to increase the understanding of both the explicit and tacit knowledge within the shipbuilding ecosystem.

Human-Machine Interfaces
We explore how advanced user interfaces such as XR technologies can be used for virtual commissioning.

AI-Enhanced Interfaces
We study how semantic search, combined with conventional search methods, can be applied for filtering, searching, retrieving, and enhancing maritime domain-specific information.

Commissioning Monitoring
The goal is to monitor the virtual commissioning process, ensuring partners are continuously informed about the status of installations, components, and systems.

----

Co-Creation Project:
PRE-Virtual Sea Trial
Time Period: 1.3.2023 - 1.9.2023

Goals: To Plan, Roadmap, and Establish the Virtual Sea Trial (PRE-VST) project consortium.

Partners: Novia University of Applied Sciences, Åbo Akademi University

In order to demonstrate the relevance and feasibility of the Virtual Sea Trial co-innovation project, the following open questions are to be answered:

Which onboard systems and tests can benefit the most from virtual testing?
What are the current main bottlenecks of commissions and trials?
What are the current practices, trends, and infrastructure for virtual testing in the shipbuilding industry and by research organizations?
A collaborative effort between researchers and industry experts from the whole shipbuilding ecosystem is required to answer these questions.

----

Co-Innovation Project:
Virtual Sea Trial
Project application to be submitted in fall 2023.

Keywords: Shift-left testing; One Sea Trial; Reducing costs, risks, and emissions of shipbuilding and commissioning; Lowering the risk of implementing innovations.

Ecosystem: Meyer NEcOLEAP Veturi

The Virtual Sea Trial project aims to develop a unified, distributed test environment for virtual sea trials and commissioning for the whole shipbuilding ecosystem. Sustainable, reliable, and greener testing and commissioning procedures are achieved by including radical new ideas on creating virtualized, shared testing environments from which the whole shipbuilding ecosystem can benefit.

Co-Simulated Sea Trial
The aim is to demonstrate that it is technically feasible to perform virtual commissioning and trial tests early in the shipbuilding process. System-level testing requires collaboration between the shipyard and vendors. Thus, a network-distributed test platform for co-simulation is to be developed. We aim to show through proofs-of-concept that simulated sea trials can ensure that a single shortened sea trial will be sufficient to pass all future ship commissioning.

Automatic Verification & Validation
The goal is to develop simulation-based verification and validation methods for maritime systems. Verifying that components and systems meet requirements and specifications and validating the system-level performance early in the shipbuilding process ensures that delays in commissioning can be minimized. 

Future Business Models
The goal is to streamline the commissioning process by implementing new agile work processes. Establishing clear guidelines for information exchange, system specifications, and collaboration among stakeholders in the shipbuilding sector is crucial in achieving this objective.